>> Richard Feldman: Okay, so I did
a little recap as part of our wrap up and
then basically just do a little
bit of further learning if there's
other resources that you're
interested in on these topics.
So at the very beginning, we talked about
how basically the fundamental job of
a compiler, whether it's ahead of time or
runtime interpreter,
is to go from source representation
to machine instructions.
Talked about how there's different
arguments about terminology is
an assembler really a compiler or
is that a different thing?
I'm not gonna take any stances on that,
but
the main thing is just like head of
time compiler runtime interpreter.
Pretty well understood what those mean.
We also talked about just-in-time
compilers, such as WebAssembly, which we
actually got to build something with, as
well as an optimization for interpreters,
which is the most common way that they're
used, such as JavaScript, PHP, Ruby, etc.
We talked about these different terms, and
sort of like assembler is low level to low
level, you have a really low abstraction.
It is human readable, but it is very,
very close to the middle language that's
compiling to something that's definitely
not human readable transpiler being
something that's going from a high level
language that is designed to be human
readable to another high level language
that's designed to be human readable.
I talked about interpreters, which are
generating the machine code at runtime.
Compilers are basically taking the input
and generating the output at compile time.
We talked about some compiler passes and
we saw a variety of them.
We talked about tokenizing,
aka Lexing that feeds into parsing,
followed by name resolution or
canonicalization, type Inference, and
then finally code generation.
We talked about basically if you're
generating code as a string,
that's essentially formatting.
So you're going from source string over to
tokens via Lexing, then tokens to parse
tree, that's parsing, name resolution,
type inference, and finally code gen.
And if what you end up at the end of all
that is a string, we call that formatting.
But if we're not compiling to that and
everything else is exactly the same,
then now we call it, it's not formatting,
it's a compiler or something like that.
And that's where we ended up doing
all of these different stages,
spending the most time on type inference,
granted, but still getting a little
bit of a taste of lexing and
parsing at the beginning, name resolution.
And then at the very end,
some code gen to WebAssembly.
Really the most classic book in all
the history of compilers is this book.
It's known as the dragon book.
I actually don't know what its name is.
I'm looking at it and
I still don't know what its name is.
It's just the dragon book,
that's what that's what it is.
When I wanted to find an image for
this, I just Googled dragon book.
This book is very famous and
also very old and out of date, so
I hesitate to recommend it and
except in the sense that it's a classic.
So I'm not saying you should read this and
then be like,
this is the best way to build compilers.
But it is maybe worth your while to read
it just because of its classic status.
A book that I have not read, but
which I have heard recommended as
an alternative to the dragon book is this
one, it's called Engineering A Compiler.
I can't first, recommend it cuz I haven't
read it, but I have heard people say that
if you want something that's more focused
on, hey, this is a practical modern
thing for people who are application
developers, I'm assuming most of us are.
Then this is like kind of a more
reasonable book to get more things.
This is also not something that I have
personally read, but I have a very strong
recommendation from one of the best
compiler authors I know, Ayaz Hafiz.
He was like, this is the book
if you wanna do get really,
really hardcore into type inference.
I'm embarrassed to say I bought it and
have read two pages of it, so
I can't endorse it yet.
But I mean, so
far the two pages were stellar so.
But yeah, if you wanna get really,
really deep into all the nuances
of different type inference
implementations and ways you can go
about optimizing different things.
This apparently is a really great book for
that.
And finally, if I could only leave you
with one thing to take away from this
is this theme of traverse the input,
generate the output, and
then traverse the thing that the previous
step Gib is really powerful.
It's not just a compiler's thing.
I mean, it is powerful in compilers,
of course, and
we got a lot of value out of it.
But it is something that comes
up even outside compilers,
in all sorts of programming.
And Steve Yegge had a famous blog
post where he's talked about,
once you've done some compiler stuff,
you start to see compilers everywhere.
And I think this is the main
thing that he's talking about.
[LAUGH] There's so many problems in
software that just break down into like,
can I get this into a more
useful representation?
And then can I get from that useful
representation into an even more useful
representation?
Really at the end of the day,
that's what we've been doing all day,
is we've started with a representation
that's nice to read but
doesn't actually run all the way in
through something where we've analyzed it,
we got outputs in the form of
naming errors and type mismatches.
We did type inference and
then finally ended up with something
that could actually run and
actually run faster than the source
code that we put in on the first place.
WebAssembly, generally speaking,
runs faster than Javascript.
So yeah, this idea, powerful idea, and
if there's one thing you can take away
from today, I would hope it would be this.
>> Speaker 2: Some final, Questions here.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, sure.
>> Speaker 2: How are recursive
types handled by type inference?
>> Richard Feldman: [LAUGH] How are
recursive types handled by type inference?
That was the first thing I'm like, we're
definitely not doing that in the workshop.
I mean, the short answer is complicatedly.
It absolutely works, but that's where
you get all sorts of gotchas around,
I mentioned the occurs check earlier.
That's really important for
recursive types.
Also, when you get to code generation,
they're a total nightmare.
And a lot of cases, especially if
you're doing monomorphization,
the short answer is,
there's just a lot of complexity there.
I don't have a concise answer the question
of, how do you do other than just,
how much time you got?
[LAUGH] Yeah.
>> Speaker 3: So I don't know a whole lot
about LLVM, but how hard would it be to
take that kind of intermediate
representation we made and plug that into
LLVM, and once you have that is that
support generating WebAssembly.
>> Richard Feldman: It does, yeah,
okay, so LLVM is also a deep topic.
I can give you some
brief points on that and
then also we can talk
more after if you want.
So the question was, so LLVM is
a compiler back end that its job is
essentially you give it an intermediate
representation that it controls.
It says, hey, instead of generating web
assembly, you generate web LLVM IR.
And then from there you can
tell LLVM it's a library.
Basically say, hey,
generate me some WebAssembly, literally,
LLVM will do that for you.
Also you can say,
generate me x86-64 machine code, or
generate me ARM64 machine code, or RISC-V.
And then they have really long
lists of generation targets.
On top of which the thing
that LLVM is most known for,
the second most thing is known for
is running really slowly.
But the thing is most known for
is its optimization passes.
So in addition to giving it the code and
saying, hey, generate me this code, first,
you can say, really,
really optimize this thing.
And LLVM is basically the gold standard in
terms of doing the best job of cranking on
your code and getting it to be so
that what the machine code that comes out
the other side runs as fast as you
can get from pretty much anything.
Unfortunately, the downside is that LLVM
takes a long time to give you that code
even if you're not optimizing anything.
So it's because of architectural
problems in LLVM rather than,
they're just working really
hard on your optimizations.
No, you can say zero optimization and
it's still very slow.
But, yes, you can totally do that for
WebAssembly.
How hard is it is a different question.
So, yeah, the ergonomics are not amazing.
It's a similar level of abstraction,
I would say,
overall to WebAssembly in terms of
they're really not giving you a lot of
conveniences compared to if
you were compiling to C or
compiling to Javascript or something
like that, like a higher level language.
It's quite low level, there are some
conviniences but, yeah, you still have to
do basically pre-similar stuff to
what we just said with WebAssembly.
The difference being that then you have
to bring in the LLVM independency and
we first along compile times and
dealing with its' api and stuff like that.
So my preference would be kind of
just go straight to WebAssembly for
something like this.
But if you wanted to,
you absolutely could in theory.
And also I didn't wanna wire up no js to
LLVM [LAUGH] that doesn't sound fun, but
in theory, yeah, you absolutely.
If you wanted to, you could take
this compiler we just built,
take the exact representations we made and
translate them into LLVM IR instead into
WebAssembly, that would totally work.
Yeah, other questions?
Was there one online?
Do I remember that, right?
>> Speaker 4: Yeah, could you talk about
the limitations of type inference?
>> Richard Feldman: The limitations
of type inference,
I would say it depends on
the type inference algorithm.
Limitations of Hindley-Milner?
I mean, I guess it's mainly opportunity
costs, just in the sense of,
if you choose Henley Miller for
your type system, you get type inference
that I don't know if it would be
hard pressed to think of something
where I could say that Hindley-Milner's
type inference has its limitations.
Well, it's principal
decidable type inference,
I don't know what else
you want [INAUDIBLE].
It doesn't get much better than like it
always correctly infers 100% of your types
and it always correctly
infers the most general type.
I'm at a loss for
what you could do better on the specific
side of type inference there.
Mind reading type inference
might be better, yeah, yeah.
>> Speaker 5: I would personally argue
that resolving into generic types is
a suboptimal idea and
maybe that's an angle.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay, but
what would you do instead?
>> Speaker 5: Yeah,
well you have to design, right?
There's a design choice in there,
you can't fully genericize, but yeah.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay, I mean, yeah,
so if you don't like it being so general,
yes, then I guess that maybe
you would want something else.
But to me, I would think that
the trade-offs are more, at least to me
personally, I would say that the type
inference capabilities of Hindley-Millner
are sort of an almost an unalloyed good,
that's just a big selling point.
The downsides would be more that, well,
yes, but if you're buying into this
system, there are these other things that
are harder, that are outside the remote
type inference,
subtyping being the biggest one.
And there are lots of nice benefits to
subtyping, also some downsides like
covariance and contravariance are become
things you have to worry about.
But yeah, in general, so I don't know if
this is what the comment was referencing,
but anything that I have heard people say
is, okay, I don't like type inference
because if I don't have types anywhere,
then it's hard for
me to understand what things are going on,
or I get spooky action at a distance where
I change one type over here and it affects
some type that's very distant to that.
The problem with that to in my mind is
that it basically is saying, okay, so
if you have the capability
to choose to annotate or
not annotate your types as much or
as little as you want, and you make bad
choices, the thing that allows you
to make those bad choices is bad.
I don't know, in some senses that logic
makes sense to me when I'm trying
to make good choices,
but it's error prone.
So again,
we've taught a workshop on C it's pretty
hard to get right a lot of the time.
But the very, very simple heuristic
of just always annotate your
top level types is something that pretty
much all professionals I've worked with,
do in languages that support this.
But then if you do that, you're not any
worse off when it comes to top level types
than languages that require it.
So I don't see how that's a downside,
really.
But then if you're writing, a small script
where I actually would prefer not to do
it here,
then it's convenient that I don't have to.
So I don't know, I have a tough time
buying the argument that it's a downside,
that it gives you that much flexibility,
because the amount of discipline and
carefulness you need to use to not have
that downside materialize is zero.
So anyway, [LAUGH] I don't know if that
was what the question was getting at,
but that's my answer to it.
>> Speaker 2: What do you
think about the SCIP book.
>> Richard Feldman: SCIP,
so SCIP structure and
interpretation of computer programs.
I mean, it doesn't really have
anything to do with compilers, really.
It's been a long time since I don't
even remember if I read all of it.
I don't know, a lot of people talk about
it as it changed the way they looked at
programming, they really loved it.
It wasn't really for me,
they talk a lot about,
I don't know, the elegance and
beauty of code and I don't know,
when I read stuff like that, I just see
slow programs that I don't wanna use.
[LAUGH] And
that was kind of the vibe for me.
But I appreciate that a lot of other
people have a very different vibe from it.
And I don't think there's any
type checking in that book, but
I assume that there is based on
the interpretation part of the title,
they do get into interpreters.
But there's a number of good,
I don't know,
highly respected interpreters
books right now.
Was it grokking interpreters?
I'm gonna blank on the name, but anyway,
there's some good interpreters book that a
lot of people seem to like by Bob Nystrom,
crafting interpreters,
that's one, yeah, thanks, right?
Grokking simplicity, an unrelated book,
yeah, Eric Normand, yeah.
Also, I hit him on the podcast.
Other questions, I think there was, yeah.
>> Speaker 6: Yeah, I just kind of wanna
go back to the kind of comparison you made
about kind of formatters, right?
And how they're kind of comparable
to compilers in a sense, or
there's a lot of overlap.
And I guess another thing that comes
to mind is like linters, right?
I guess, I'm curious to know what are some
other maybe underutilized kind of maybe
not necessarily, I don't know the right
term for comparisons or comparable use
cases for just parsing and things that are
adjacent to compiling, that you could do
with code more generally,
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah,
it's a good question, I mean,
I haven't sat down and made a list.
I have to think about that,
I don't know, I thought about these,
because I think about compilers a lot.
[LAUGH] But as far as other things, yeah,
I don't have a list off
the top of my head.
I'll think about it.
Thanks very much.
>> [APPLAUSE]